Literature Review:
Measuring job satisfaction in surveys - Comparative analytical report by Cabrita, JorgePerista, Heloísa, European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, 2006. The main objective of this comparative analytical report is to assess whether and how the job satisfaction issue is addressed in national surveys, and to examine some data and trends on job satisfaction. This report revealed how national surveys produce data on job satisfaction, focusing on the methodologies used, and presented available data on job satisfaction.
•	Concept of job satisfaction
Job satisfaction is simply how people feel about their jobs and different aspects of their jobs. It is the extent to which people like (satisfaction) or dislike (dissatisfaction) their jobs. (Spector, 1997)
•	Measuring job satisfaction in Europe
Job satisfaction is measured in many different ways in the national surveys, with a variety of questions and wordings. There is no consensus about the best or standard way to measure job satisfaction. In the reference literature, below directions have been measured.
a.	Education
Regarding the relationship between job satisfaction and peoples’ education, there seems to be a common trend in those countries that had available data: the higher the education level, the higher the degree of job satisfaction among employees.
b.	Job status
Although the diversity of job status categories used in different countries makes it difficult to compare results, it is possible nevertheless to identify some common findings. According to the results of the surveys from Austria, the Czech Republic, Denmark and Germany, workers with permanent employment contracts are more satisfied than workers with fixed-term contracts and/or temporary workers. Thus, it seems that job satisfaction increases with job security.
c.	Gender
According to Bender, Donohue and Heywood (2005), ‘the long-standing interest in estimating the size of the gender earnings gap has recently prompted a complementary interest in estimating the gender gap in job satisfaction’. In fact, the interest in job satisfaction has yielded a set of reasonable findings regarding its determinants. Still, ‘the issue attracting the most attention has been the role of gender as a determinant of job satisfaction.
d.	Age
Figures on job satisfaction by age do not show an identical behaviour pattern in all countries analysed. While, in some surveys, data point to an increasing job satisfaction with age, others indicate the opposite. There are also some cases in which there is no clear connection between job satisfaction and age.
e.	Marital status and parenting/number of children
Regarding job satisfaction by marital status, a recurring result in some countries is that single people are among those most - if not the most - satisfied with their jobs. This is the case in Austria, Bulgaria, Germany, Portugal (‘never married’ group) and Romania (‘single people/unmarried’).
•	Job satisfaction and working time/work-life balance
It would be expected that job satisfaction is negatively related to working hours - that people with longer working hours would be less satisfied with their jobs than those working less hours. However, according to the contributions from Denmark and Portugal, there is in fact a positive relationship between working hours and job satisfaction.

